Let's start with the status quo, how does our application we build thus far work
and with that, I'm not just referring to the rest API but to the shop we built before that
too. How do typical node or node express applications work like?
We got our client, we got our server. The client would be our browser, mobile phone or something like that,
the server is of course essentially what we build, our node application.
Now thus far, we always send a request from the client,
we waited for this request on the server,
we set up some routes to handle different kinds of requests
and once we're done doing something on the server, for example reach out to a database, we send back a
response to the client.
So first request then response.
Now that is how our application works thus far
and this is how most web applications work
and by the way, we're now not going to replace this with something totally new which we'll then use all
the time,
this is a fine pattern because a lot of resources on the Internet should be available by this pull approach.
So you pull information from the client, you tell the server that you want something,
this is a typical approach and is a fine approach
but sometimes you have a different requirement.
What if you want to send something from the server to the client, so what if something happens and you
want to inform the client?
Let's say you're building a chat application, user A on PC A or on his mobile phone sends a message
to user B.
Now obviously they're not sharing the same device,
they might be in two totally different places on the world.
Now user A sends a request to the server that contains the message and the server stores the message
in the database and the server can return a response to user A
but user B, the person with whom user A chats does not send a request to the server asking for the message
or at least that is unlikely to happen.
You could certainly use some patterns where you send a request every second to see if there are new
messages
but you'll then hammer your server with requests where most requests will not yield new messages.
So instead it would be nice to have some push way of informing user B about the new message
and that is exactly the scenario we're looking at here.
What if something changed on the server and we actively want to inform a client? Well then we can use
web sockets instead of http.
Now http is the protocol we used thus far
where we send a request and we get a response.
Web sockets build up on http,
they are established via http,
they use a so-called http handshake to upgrade the http protocol to the web sockets protocol and the web
sockets protocol, that simply talks about how data is exchanged,
right.
So this protocol is something you don't have to manage
actively, the browser and the server communicate through a protocol and the used protocol defines how the communication
can happen. With http, it's request response, with web sockets,
it is push data or actually it's both.
We can also send data from the client to the server, this is still included
but most importantly and that's the feature I really want to highlight here,
we can push data from the server to the client. And you can and you typically will use both together in
one and the same node app,
so it's not like you have to decide, do I build an app with web sockets or do a build one with http.
You still have a lot of places where you want to use that request response pattern,
for example if you are sending a message or if you're creating a user,
these are operations where you do send some information from the browser to the server.
So there, the request response scenario makes perfect sense
but if you have some active notification you want to get to your users, then you also want to integrate
web sockets.
Now let me show you how to add web sockets to your project in the next lectures.